
## Tao Sheng CS 1501 Assignment 2 Writeup

### Solving Part 1

Part 1 involved figuring out how to retrieve the score for a certain word, how to increment that score, and how to add words into the DLB trie. 

The provided getNode function proved useful for the two score methods because it could return a pointer that is directly on the last DLBNode of the inputted word. getNode() itself traverses the list recursively. Then, I could simply use the .score attribute for each DLBNode and just increment it by 1 when it was called with notifyWordSelected(). For retrieving the score, it was simply a matter of returning the .score int. 

The add method took more effort. This was based heavily on the put() method in DLB.java of Lab 5. The challenge was using an .isWord flag to replace a sentinel character. Originally, we could simply traverse add everything (by concatenating the sentinel character to the end of the key) and the other functions would tell if something was a word if it detected the sentinel. In this case, we had to manually set the flag for isWord (default is false) to true when the word was completely added, which was when our cursor was pointing to the last letter of the input word in the DLBTrie. Then, we could set the flag to true. I debugged this with printTree() which revealed the isWord booleans and compared it to the theoretical trie structure. 

### Solving Part 2

Part 2 was far more difficult. I first implemented the Suggestion class which, according to A2Test.java, takes the word and score as its two attributes. I then setup a constructor to take these two arguments. Then, I implemented the comparable interface for suggestions because it will be used in Collections.sort (for the retrievewords method). I based my new compareTo method off the java's implementation where it returns 1 if this is < other, -1 if this > other, and if they tie, they should then compare alphabetically in the typical fashion. This is opposite of how typically compareTo is implemented because we want the highest scores to be first (Collections.sort by default does this the other way). Then, we want to compare alphabetically but this should proceed from lowest to highest (a < b < c < ... z). 

In the retrieve words helper method, I started with pseudocode which looked something like this:

	retrieveWords(StringBuilder input):
		set a new cursor to getNode(input)
		go down until isWord == true all while	
		appending to the StringBuilder
	if (isWord) then arraylist.add(input) 
		recursive call on the child
		while going up find the highest sibling and 
		go to that (curr = curr.sibling)

Essentially, this method had to traverse the DLB Trie to look for words and if one is found. It should be appending to a StringBuilder as we go down the Trie and adding to the ArrayList if a word is found. Backtracking is done by removing the last character (after recursive call), and it will attempt to go to a sibling node after.  

The main method initialized an ArrayList of type Suggestion and passed it into a helper method that took the input word, a node, and that ArrayList. From there, it was a challenge of replicating the collect() method in DLB.java of Lab 5 but making it work for this assignment. I ran into issues where the command line input for finding a suggestion would just be printed out several times with random scores, and another when I would be adding to the ArrayList something that's not a word into the trie (example would be that "ay" would be considered a word for some reason when it's not in small.txt). The second error meant to me that there is something wrong with traversing the trie because my add() method when tested before retrieveWords() would yield the theoretical result, however I later discovered that I did not cover all the base cases. If I was attempting to use an input from the user that was already a word, then I would be appending further and it would miss it. I fixed this by adding a base case in the main retrieveWords() method that checked if the input was already a word and added that straight in and then I would pass in the child of the input. Null pointer exceptions were fixed by having a null check as the first line in the retrieveWords() helper method. 

### Asymptotic Analysis (Worst-Case Runtimes)

My methods relied on the getNode method which traverses the DLB. This is the highest order operation in my insertion (add) method, score incrementing (notifyWordSelected), score retrieval (getScore), and suggestion retrieval (retrieveWords) methods. These should all be in, under worst case scenarios (which is unlikely because most of the levels will not have that many characters), in theta (w * r) time, given w is the number characters (the character alphabet used here is 26 long) for possible comparisons and r is the key size (number of characters in a word or prefix). Therefore DLB Tries' worst case runtimes are unaffected by the number of comparisons and dictionary size. 

	Insertion
		Θ (w*r)
	Score incrementing
		Θ (w*r)
	Score retrieval
		Θ (w*r)
	Suggestion retrievals
		Θ (w*r)

